Introduction. During World War Two, if one single weapon in Germany's arsenal can be said to have come closest to winning the war for the Third Reich, it was without doubt the U-Boat.
2.	Winston Churchill himself admitted as much when, after the war, he revealed that the U-Boat menace was the only thing that had really caused him to fear that Great Britain would lose the war against German). Had this happened, the Allies would have been deprived of Great Britain as a base from which to launch operations against the Third Reich, and the invasion of German-occupied Europe would probably never have taken place.
3.	German U-Boat technology, training, tactics and combat successes far exceeded those of any of the other combatant nations, and even as the Third Reich was crumbling, technically advanced vessels such as the Type XXI, many years ahead of its time, were being put into volume production.
4.	The ultimate defeat of the U-Boat threat owed much to a single intelligence coup by the British – the discovery of the German 'Schlusselmaschine', the so-called 'Enigma' encoding device, and the subsequent reconstruction of such a device, which led to British cryptologists cracking the German secret codes. The British were thus able to intercept and decode much of the German signals traffic, allowing them to track down German submarines and their supply vessels at rendezvous points thought to be secret, and to reroute convoys away from areas where U-Boats were know n to be lying in wait.
5.	The breathing space which this discovery gave the British allowed time for the development of sophisticated direction finders and underwater detection devices, which finally turned the tide of war against the U-Boats. In view of the fact that for the greater part of the war the U-Boats had, unbeknown to them, the odds stacked against them, the achievements of the U-Boot Waffe were  impressive.
6.	Despite the understandably biased Allied reportage, the vast majority of U-Boat commanders carried out their duties in as honourable a fashion as this type of warfare allowed. This is attested to by the fact that so many Allied senior naval figures came forward after the war, when attempts were being made to vilify U-Boat men as war criminals, and averred that they themselves had behaved in at least as aggressive a manner, if not more so  – especially in the case of some American submarine crews serving in Pacific waters – as their German counterparts.
7.	U-Boat crewmen were predominantly volunteers throughout the war, and selection procedures were rigorous in the extreme, resulting in the U-Boot Waffe taking much of the cream of Germany's naval personnel. Though much depended on the personality of the individual commander, traditionally rigid German military discipline was much relaxed for U-Boat crews. Each man felt himself very much dependent on the others, and an  second to none quickly formed among them. To this day, there is a thriving U-Boat veterans 'community', and the U-Boot Waffe has its own very striking war memorial at Moltenort, near Kiel.
8.	Mention of U-Boats almost invariably brings to mind the great aces of World War Two, names like Kretschmer, Prien, Schepke, Luth, von Tiesenhausen and others, and the equally exceptional achievements of the U-Boat aces of World War One are often forgotten. However, what was probably the greatest single achievement in submarine warfare, the sinking of three major enemy warships by one German U-Boat in a single engagement, occurred during World War One. Korvettenkapitan Lothar Arnauld de la Periere, the greatest U-Boat ace of all time-sinking 54 enemy vessels in a single cruise – was also an officer of the Kaiserliche Marine. His name, and others such as Weddigen and Hartwig, though famous throughout the U-Boat fraternity, are little known outside Germany.
9.	This book is intended to give the reader an overview of the achievements of the U-Boot Waffe in both wars, together with a study of the uniforms and insignia worn by U-Boat crews.
10.	THE KAISERLICHE MARINE. When war began on 1 August 1914, Germany possessed only 20 U-Boats ready for action, compared with the Royal Navy's total of over 70 submarines. Three days later, Great Britain declared war on Germany, and ten U-Boats, half of Germany's entire fleet, set off on their first war cruise. Their target was nothing less than the Grand Fleet. In the event, two U-Boats were lost – one to a minefield – and not a single British warship was sunk; the cruise was a complete failure. On 5 September, however, the U-Boats scored their first major success when Leutnant zur See Otto Hersig sank the cruiser H.M.S. Pathfinder. Barely three weeks later Oberleutnant zur See Otto Weddigen encountered a force of British warships. In the space of less than an hour he sent the cruisers Aboukir, Cressy and Hogue to the bottom. Germany was delighted with its new heroes, and every member of the crew was decorated. Weddigen's boat, the U-9, was granted the right to bear the emblem of the Iron Cross on its conning-tower. No one could now doubt the potency of the U-Boat as a weapon, and German attacks on Allied shipping steadily increased.
11.	One thing worried some factions in the German government: a large proportion of Britain's essential imported materials was carried by neutral ships, and it was feared that attacks on them might bring more countries into the war on Britain's side. By the beginning of 1915, however, the Germans had real ised that their rather optimistic hopes for a speedy victory  were unrealistic, and that the war at sea would have to be pursued with greater determination. Accordingly the waters around the coast of Great Britain were declared a war zone by Kaiser Wilhelm, with the warning that any shipping, including neutral ships carrying war materials, encountered there was liable to be sunk without warning. Within eight months the average monthly total of Allied shipping being sunk had risen from just under 50,000 ton to almost 200,000 tons.
12.	The decision to allow unrestricted submarine warfare had, as some Germans had feared, enraged many neutral nations, the United States in particular, since deaths of neutral citizens sometimes occurred. Then, in May 1915, the U-20, under the command of Oberleutnant zur See Walther Schwieger, intercepted and sunk the liner Lusitania off the southern tip of Ireland. Although it was subsequently clearly established that the liner had indeed been carrying contraband war materials, in the form of thousands of cases of ammunition, shrapnel shells and fuses, Schwieger could not have known this, and his sinking of this great liner, with the loss of 1,198 lives, 128 of them  American, provoked international outrage.
13.	The consequences for Germany were grave, as the previously staunch isolationism of the United States gave way to a very pro-British and anti-German viewpoint, which contributed to the ultimate American decision to enter the war against the Central Powers.
14.	In June the Kaiser called off attacks on passenger ships and in September he abandoned unrestricted attacks on merchant ships. The Germans then transferred the bulk of their U-Boat effort to the Mediterranean, and it was in this theatre that the greatest number of sinkings was achieved. In the space of just one month Korvenenkapitan Lothar Arnauld de la Periere sunk 54 ships, a total of over 91,000 tons. He expended just four torpedoes, sinking most of his victims with gunfire while surfaced. A chivalrous adversary, he invariably allowed the crews to abandon ship, and gave them sailing instructions to the nearest landfall before sending their ships to the bottom. By the end of the war he had reached the incredible total of over 200 enemy ships sunk, totaling almost half a million tons.
15.	The Allies had little of effect to use against the U-Boats, and by the summer of 1916 around a million tons of Allied hipping had been sunk. Although the British did make use of the so-called 'Q-ships' - auxiliary cruisers disguised a innocent merchantmen intended to lure the U-Boat to the surface, whereupon the cruiser would bring her hidden guns to bear and sink the U-Boat – during the entire war only 14 U-Boats were lost in this war. In one such case, when U-27 was sunk by the Q-Ship Baralong, the survivors from U-27, including her captain, expecting to be rescued by the British, were hunted down one by one and brutally shot. By mid-1916 the U-Boat fleet had grown dramatically, and numbered over 134 vessels, including massive U-Freighters – large submarines that could bring vital supplies of war materials through the British blockade of German waters. By the end of that year Allied shipping losses were reaching crisis proportions. Between October and December of 1916 alone almost half a million tons of shipping were lost.
16.	The Kaiser now gave his unhesitating support to the U-Boat war once again, and in 1917 the efforts of his U-Boat crews were rewarded with remarkable successes: in February 1917 over 256,000 tons of enemy shipping was sunk; in March the total reached 284,000 tons; and in April, over 516,000 tons. Were it not for the United States' entry into the war, in April 1917, it looked almost certain that the U-Boat campaign alone would bring Britain to its knees. In May 1917 over 540,000 tons of shipping was sunk, and the Admiralty gloomily predicted that if things continued thus, the war would be lost by the end of the year.
17.	Then, in that same month, the British introduced the 'convoy' system to give merchant ships travelling together some degree of protection. It certainly paid dividends: only two per cent of ships travelling in convoy were lost as opposed to ten per cent of ships travelling alone. At the same time the Allies began a massive series of mine-laying operations, from Scapa Flow to the Norwegian coast, across the English Channel and along the Danish, Dutch and Norwegian coasts, effectively preventing the U-Boats from entering the Atlantic.
18.	In July 1916 the most effective weapon against submarines so far, the depth charge, claimed its first U-Boat victim. The entry of the United States into the war had also meant a huge influx of warships for the Allies for convoy protection duties and for hunting down the U-Boats. From then on Allied shipping losses were drastically reduced, while U-Boat losses soared. Gradually Allied shipping production over-took losses, and the U-Boat was no longer in a position to decide the war in Germany's favour. Despite a brief flirtation with the concept of U-Cruisers  – large submarines fitted with six-inch guns, which did have some success  – the German high command lost faith in the U-Boat as the 'wonder weapon' which would bring ultimate victory. By 1918 U-Boat losses in comparison with tonnages sunk had reached an unacceptable level, and the morale of the U-Boat crews had deteriorated drastically. In October of that year, in view of impending peace negotiations, all offensive action against enemy shipping was halted. The last significant part played by the U-Boats in World War One was in the suppression of the German naval mutiny in October 1918. Loyal to the end, U-Boat crews were fully prepared to carry out their orders to 'fire without warning on any vessel flying the red flag'.
19.	On 9 November 1918 all U-Boats were ordered to return to home ports to prepare for surrender.